Dominick "Dom" Cobb (Leonardo DiCaprio) and Arthur (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) are "extractors", people who perform corporate espionage using an experimental military technology to infiltrate the subconscious of their targets and extract information while experiencing shared dreaming. Their latest target is Japanese businessman Saito (Ken Watanabe). The extraction from Saito fails when sabotaged by a memory of Cobb's deceased wife Mal (Marion Cotillard). Saito reveals that he was actually auditioning the team to perform the difficult act of "inception": planting an idea in a person's subconscious.

In order to break up the energy conglomerate of ailing competitor Maurice Fischer (Pete Postlethwaite), Saito wants Cobb to plant into the mind of Fischer's son and heir, Robert (Cillian Murphy), the idea of dissolving his father's company. Should Cobb succeed, Saito tells Cobb he will use his influence to clear Cobb of a murder charge, which will allow Cobb to return home to his children. Although Arthur claims that inception is impossible as it is always possible to trace the origin of an idea, Cobb, claiming past experience, accepts the offer and sets about assembling his team: Eames (Tom Hardy), a conman and identity forger; Yusuf (Dileep Rao), a chemist who concocts a powerful sedative for a stable "dream within a dream" strategy; Ariadne (Ellen Page), an architecture student tasked with designing the labyrinth of the dream landscapes, recruited with the help of Professor Stephen Miles (Michael Caine). Saito insists on accompanying the team to verify their success. When Ariadne shares a dream with Cobb, he reveals to her that his subconscious recreates Mal, and she appears frequently in his dreams as a hostile force.

When the elder Fischer dies in Sydney, Robert Fischer accompanies the body on a flight back to Los Angeles, which the team uses as an opportunity to isolate Fischer. Cobb sedates him, bringing him into a shared dream with the extractors. At each level in the layered dreaming, the person generating the dream stays behind to set up a "kick" that will be used to awaken the other sleeping team members who have entered another dream layer deeper. While death in a dream would, under normal circumstances, cause the dreamer to wake up, the sedatives used to stabilize the dreams would not allow that. Thus, death during the mission will result in entering "Limbo", an expanse of infinite raw subconscious from which it is very difficult to escape.

In the first level, the team enter Yusuf's dream of a rainy Los Angeles. The team abducts Fischer, but it emerges that Fischer has been trained to resist extraction. He reflexively creates a team of bodyguards who protect him, wounding Saito severely. Even worse, a barreling freight train plows down the avenue, batting aside cars and trucks and cutting off Cobb, Yusuf and Ariadne from the rest of the team. Eames temporarily takes the appearance of Fischer's godfather, Peter Browning (Tom Berenger), to suggest Fischer reconsider his father's will. Yusuf drives the team in a van as the rest are sedated into the second level, a hotel dreamed by Arthur. On this level, the extractors recruit Fischer, convincing him that his kidnapping was orchestrated by Browning and that they are Fischer's subconscious protectors. They persuade him to go down another level to explore Browning's subconscious (whereas it is actually a ruse to enter his own). The third level is a snowy mountain fortress dreamed by Eames. Meanwhile, Yusuf, under assault in the first level, accidentally initiates his kick too soon by driving off a bridge, removing the gravity of Arthur's dream world and causing an avalanche in Eames' dream. Arthur is forced to improvise a new kick using an elevator that will be synchronized with the van hitting the water, while the team in Eames' dream races to finish the job before the new round of kicks.

Saito succumbs to his wounds, and Cobb's projection of Mal sabotages the plan by killing Fischer, sending them both into Limbo.[13] Cobb and Ariadne enter Limbo to find Fischer and Saito, while Eames remains on his dream level to set up a kick by rigging the fortress with explosives. Cobb reveals to Ariadne that he and Mal went to Limbo while experimenting with the dream-sharing technology, where they spent "fifty years" of experienced time constructing a world from their shared memories while seemingly growing old together. Cobb confesses that in order to ensure Mal would leave Limbo, he had implanted the idea that her reality was false in her head in the first place; this was how he knew that inception was possible. The experience destabilised Mal, and left her convinced that she was still dreaming even after they had woken up. In an attempt to "wake up" from real life, Mal committed suicide, and tried desperately to persuade Cobb to do so too by incriminating him in her death. Facing a murder charge, Cobb fled the U.S. His children, who appear frequently in his dreams, are in California in the care of Professor Miles, who is Mal's father.

Through his confession, Cobb attains catharsis and chooses to remain in Limbo to search for Saito. Ariadne pushes Fischer off a balcony, resuscitating him at the mountain fortress, where he enters a safe room to discover and accept the planted idea: a vision of his father telling him to be his own man, and split up his father's company. All team members other than Cobb and Saito ride the synchronized kicks back to reality: Ariadne jumps off a balcony in Limbo, Eames detonates the explosives in the fortress, Arthur blasts an elevator containing the team's sleeping bodies up an elevator shaft, and the van in Yusuf's dream hits the water. Cobb eventually finds an aged Saito in Limbo (shown in medias res at the start of the film) and the two remember their arrangement, presumably shooting themselves and waking to outer-world reality back on the airplane, where the entire team and Robert Fischer have awakened.

Upon arrival at Los Angeles Airport, Cobb successfully passes the U.S. immigration checkpoint and his waiting father-in-law accompanies him to his children. Cobb flicks his small top, a totem for verifying one's dream state, but leaves it spinning on the table to join his family in the garden.
